# Monitor App Performance

## Application Insights
Extension of Azure Monitor. 
- Proactive monitoring of the app;
- Reactive review app execution data.

App Insights features:
- Live metrics - real time activity of the app;
- availability - probe app endpoints;
- GitHub / Azure DevOps integration;
- Usage - usage of features;
- Smart detection - automatic failure and anomaly detection;
- Application Map - high level top-down view of app architecture;
- Distributed tracing - visualize end-to-end flow.

Monitoring data:
- Request rates, response time, failure rates;
- Dependency rates, response time, failure rates;
- Exceptions;
- Page views and load performance;
- AJAX calls;
- User and session counts;
- Performance counters;
- Host diagnostics;
- Diagnostic trace logs;
- Custom events and metrics;

## Log-based metrics

Custom logs can be stored by AppInsights. AppInsights can reduce amount of logs by sampling and filtering.
Kusto Query Language for querying that logs.

## Pre-aggregated metrics (Standard metrics)
They stored as pre-aggregated time series. Useful for near real-time alerting and dashboards.
- `GetMetric("M").TrackValue(V)` - pre-aggregated;

## Instrumentation
- Auto-instrumentation
- App Insights SDK
- OpenCensus

## Availability test
Recurring test to check availability of the WebApi or Web Site.
- URL ping test;
- Standard test - URL test + SSL verification, HTTP verb, headers check;
- Custom TrackAvailability test.
- Multi-step - available only in VS. Better use custom.

## Troubleshoot app performance by using Application Map
Each node on map is app dependency with health KPI and alert status.

- Components are not SQL, Event Hubs etc.