# Azure App Configuration

Benefits:
- Dedicated service
- Key representation and mapping
- Tagging
- Point-in-time replay in settings
- UI for feature flag management
- Comparison of two sets of configs
- Security via Azure-managed identities
- Encryption of info on rest and transit
- Integration with frameworks

Keys - key-value pairs.
Hierarchy by separate symbols like . or :
Labels - label of value for a key. E.g.:
```
Key = AppName:DbEndpoint & Label = Test
Key = AppName:DbEndpoint & Label = Staging
Key = AppName:DbEndpoint & Label = Production
```
Labels can be used for versioning.

Query key value = key + label(nullable).

## Application features
- Feature flag - on or off for particular part of code that corresponds to a feature;
- Feature manager - app package, that handle state of all feature flags, caching, refreshing state.
- Filter - rule of evaluation of feature flag state. Can be user group, region, device type.

## Securing of the data
### Encryption
Encryption via customer-managed key. 
Customer-management capability must be enabled. Key is store in the AzureKeyVault and AAC get accessed it via managed identity.

Requirements:
- Standard tier;
- Key vault with soft delete and purge protection;
- SA or RSA-HSM key within the Key Vault.

1. Assign a managed identity to the Azure App Configuration instance
2. Grant the identity GET, WRAP, and UNWRAP permissions in the target Key Vault's access policy.

### Private endpoint
Data between app and Az App Config traveling via virtual network VNet.
- Block all public endpoint traffic;
- Increased security of the VNet by not escaping data from it;
- VPN or ExpressRoute to connect Az App Config with on-premise app.

### Managed identities
Assigning identity on the App Config.
```bash
# system-assigned
az appconfig identity assign \ 
    --name myTestAppConfigStore \ 
    --resource-group myResourceGroup

# user-assigned
az identity create --resource-group myResourceGroup --name myUserAssignedIdentity

az appconfig identity assign --name myTestAppConfigStore \ 
    --resource-group myResourceGroup \ 
    --identities /subscriptions/[subscription id]/resourcegroups/myResourceGroup/providers/Microsoft.ManagedIdentity/userAssignedIdentities/myUserAssignedIdentity
```

